#Capstone Project
##Motivations

Why did you choose this field/project?
I've been fascinated with sports (especially baseball) statistics since I was a kid. They are kind of nostalgic for me. But they've also been shown to have real substance in terms of predictive ability. Because I have some intuition about their meaning, they seemed like a great place to practice my nascent data science skills. 

##Data Set

What is this data about? Why did you choose this data? What are the fields in the data? How was the data collected? What are any caveats about the data that should be known? Where can the data be found?

To quote the website (seanlahman.com): 
This database contains pitching, hitting, and fielding statistics for Major League Baseball from 1871 through 2012.  It includes data from the two current leagues (American and National), the four other "major" leagues (American Association, Union Association, Players League, and Federal League), and the National Association of 1871-1875. 

This database was created by Sean Lahman, who pioneered the effort to make baseball statistics freely available to the general public. What started as a one man effort in 1994 has grown tremendously, and now a team of researchers have collected their efforts to make this the largest and most accurate source for baseball statistics available anywhere.

I chose this particular set because it is freely available, easily accessible and well documented. For that same reason, it carries some caveats, namely that it omits all of the sabermetric fields that are generated by many of the for-fee baseball stats services. For example, you have to create a WAR field yourself with this data, which requires getting ballpark and season adjustment factors yourself...no small feat. It also does not show intra-game (e.g. down to the at-bat or pitch) level, so I cannot use this data to make inferences about performance or decision making at that level.

##Problem Statement

What goal are you trying to achieve with your analysis?

My main goal is to evaluate a set of player valuation methods, using past performance and static player characteristics (e.g. age, experience, biometrics) as indicators for future performance. I know that plenty such methods already exist, and I will look at them as benchmarks, but I want to learn how to do it myself.

##Hypotheses

What assumptions are you testing against with your analysis?

I want to test hypotheses about early career success being a harbinger of extended career success. In general, I believe that is true - that baseball success is driven primarily by talent, with practice and hard work playing a lesser (but still significant) role. I also want to test some of the assumptions used in drafting players, such as the notion that well-proportioned high school stars are more likely to be great MLB players than more average-sized college players. This theory was one of the conventions challenged by the thinking in Moneyball. 

##Projected Methodology

How do you plan on approaching the problem? What technologies, tools, algorithms do you plan to use?

I'll get to use pandas extensively to merge together multiple tables, standardize the stats, add some derived fields, and do group-bys on players at different levels of aggregation (e.g. age, experience, position). I will use some vector distance distance methods to standardize some of the more complex comparisons, because performance will be a combination of a variety of fields. I might use some clustering and regression, but plan to mostly use machine learning (random forests and neural networks) to predict future performance based on past performance and player characteristics. I believe this can all be done in python, without the need for a database, but I could very well be wrong. 
